add RFC021 vp_token-brearer grant type for oauth2 (#265)
nuts-foundation/nuts-specification: rfc/rfc021-vp_token-grant-type.md

# RFC021 VP Token Grant Type

|                           |                  |
|:--------------------------|:-----------------|
| Nuts foundation           | W.M. Slakhorst   |
| Request for Comments: 021 | Nedap            |
|                           | September 2023   |

## VP Token Grant Type

### Abstract

This specification defines the use of a Verifiable Presentation Bearer
Token as a means for requesting an OAuth 2.0 access token.

### Status of document

This document is currently in draft.

### Copyright Notice

![](../.gitbook/assets/license.png)

This document is released under the [Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International \(CC BY-SA 4.0\) license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

## 1.  Introduction

A Verifiable Presentation [VP] is an encoding that enables identity and security  information base  on Verifiable Credentials to be shared  across security domains. 
A security token is generally issued by an Identity Provider and consumed by a Relying Party that relies on its content to identify  the token's subject for security-related purposes. 

> In the case of  Verifiable Credentials, the identity provider role is fulfilled by  the holder using a wallet. The relying party role equals the verifier  role as defined by the Verifiable Credentials specification.

Author: yes it's a holder-of-key assertion. But it gives a bearer token. It's the same as in RFC7523?

In OAuth, an authorization grant is an abstract term used to describe intermediate credentials that represent the resource owner authorization. 
An authorization grant is used by the client to obtain an access token.  Several authorization grant types are defined to support a wide range of client types and user experiences. 
OAuth also allows for the definition of new extension grant types to support additional clients or to provide a bridge between OAuth and other trust frameworks. 
Finally, OAuth allows the definition of additional authentication mechanisms to be used by clients when interacting with the authorization server.

"Assertion Framework for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants" [RFC7521] is an abstract extension to OAuth 2.0 that provides a general framework for the use of assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) as client credentials and/or authorization grants with OAuth 2.0. 
This specification profiles the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] to define an extension grant type that uses a Verifiable Presentation Bearer Token to request an OAuth 2.0 access token.

## 2. Terminology

> All terms are as defined in the following specifications: "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework" [RFC6749], the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] "JSON Web Token (JWT)" [JWT], Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL], Verifiable Credentials Presentation Exchange [PE], JSON Web Signature 2020 [JSONWebSignature2020], Decentralized Identifiers 1.0 [DID].

Author: fixed to 2.0.0

## 3. HTTP Parameter Bindings for Transporting Assertions

The OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] defines generic HTTP parameters for transporting assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) during interactions with a token endpoint. 
This section defines specific parameters and treatments of those parameters for use with VP Bearer Tokens as Authorization Grants.

To use a VP as an authorization grant, the client uses an access token request as defined in Section 4 of the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] with the following specific parameter values and encodings.

The value of the "grant_type" is "vp_token-bearer".

The value of the "assertion" parameter MUST contain a Verifiable Presentation. The Verifiable Presentation MUST be encoded as either:

* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JSON using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.
* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JWT according to section §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

> The "scope" parameter MUST be used, as defined in the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521], to indicate the requested scope. 

Author: Added steps to introduction.

The following parameter MUST be added:

* `vp_formats`: An object defining the formats and proof types of Verifiable Presentations and Verifiable Credentials that a Verifier supports as stated by §9 of the OpenID for Verifiable Presentations specification [OIDC4VP].

When processing the assertion the authorization server can detect the used format by checking the initial character.
A JSON encoded assertion starts with a '{' character or '%7B' when urlencoded.

## 4. Processing requirements

In order to issue an access token response as described in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749], the authorization server MUST validate the VP.
The validation requirements are split into three paragraphs. The first paragraph describes the requirements that apply to all VP's.
The second paragraph describes the requirements that apply to JWT encoded VP's. The third paragraph describes the requirements that apply to JSON encoded VP's.

### 4.1 General requirements

1. The authorization server MUST validate the Presentation Submission according to section 6 of the Presentation Exchange [PE] specification.

> 2. The authorization server MUST validate the VP according to section 6.1 of the Presentation Exchange [PE] specification.

Reviewer: the PE spec is in flux meaning that section numbers can change. We need  to pick a version of the spec.

2. The proof of the VP MUST be a valid [JSONWebSignature2020] object.
3. The `challenge` field of the JSON object MUST be a string that is unique for each request.
4. The `domain` field of the JSON object MUST be a DID under control of the Authorization Server.
5. The `verificationMethod` field of the Proof MUST be a DID URL.
6. The `holder` field if present MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
7. The `verificationMethod` field of the proof MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.

## 5. Presentation Definition endpoint

In order for a client to know which Presentation Definition [PE] to use, the authorization server MUST provide a Presentation Definition endpoint.
The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST be registered as a `presentation_definition_endpoint` in the authorization server metadata [RFC8414].
The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST return a Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.

> ## 6. Access Token Introspection

Author: Has been rewritten as suggestion.

The authorization server MUST support the access token introspection endpoint as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC7662].
The introspection endpoint MUST return the following fields:

* `iss`: The issuer of the access token.
* `sub`: The subject of the access token.
* `exp`: The expiration time of the access token.
* `iat`: The time the access token was issued.
* `scope`: The granted scope.
* `vcs`: The Verifiable Credentials that were used to request the access token.

> ## 7. Security Considerations

Author: Will add to privacy considerations

* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JSON using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.
* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JWT according to section §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

The "scope" parameter MUST be used, as defined in the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521], to indicate the requested scope. 
The scope parameter determines the set of credentials the authorization server expects.

The "presentation_submission" parameter MUST be used, as defined in Presentation Exchange [PE], to indicate how the VP matches the requested Verifiable Credentials.
The Presentation Submission MUST be encoded using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.

The following example demonstrates an access token request with a VP as an authorization grant (with extra line breaks for display purposes only):

     POST /token.oauth2 HTTP/1.1
     Host: as.example.com
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

     grant_type=vp_token-bearer
     &assertion=eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjE2In0.
     eyJpc3Mi[...omitted for brevity...].
     J9l-ZhwP[...omitted for brevity...]

>      &presentation_submission= {..}

Reviewer: state is missing

Author: you mean `scope`?

This specification profiles the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] to define an extension grant type that uses a Verifiable Presentation Bearer Token to request an OAuth 2.0 access token.

## 2. Terminology

All terms are as defined in the following specifications: "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework" [RFC6749], the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] "JSON Web Token (JWT)" [JWT], Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL], Verifiable Credentials Presentation Exchange [PE], JSON Web Signature 2020 [JSONWebSignature2020], Decentralized Identifiers 1.0 [DID].

## 3. HTTP Parameter Bindings for Transporting Assertions

The OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] defines generic HTTP parameters for transporting assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) during interactions with a token endpoint. 
This section defines specific parameters and treatments of those parameters for use with VP Bearer Tokens as Authorization Grants.

To use a VP as an authorization grant, the client uses an access token request as defined in Section 4 of the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] with the following specific parameter values and encodings.

> The value of the "grant_type" is "urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:vp_token-bearer".

Reviewer 2: if it's not an IETF RFC, we should specify it as such?

Author: I'll remove the prefix for now.

The value of the "assertion" parameter MUST contain a Verifiable Presentation. The Verifiable Presentation MUST be encoded as either:

* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JSON using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.
* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JWT according to section §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

The "scope" parameter MUST be used, as defined in the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521], to indicate the requested scope. 
The scope parameter determines the set of credentials the authorization server expects.

The "presentation_submission" parameter MUST be used, as defined in Presentation Exchange [PE], to indicate how the VP matches the requested Verifiable Credentials.

> The Presentation Submission MUST be encoded using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.

Reviewer 2: but it's JSON?

Author: Yes, so correct escaping is required.

The following example demonstrates an access token request with a VP as an authorization grant (with extra line breaks for display purposes only):

     POST /token.oauth2 HTTP/1.1
     Host: as.example.com
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

     grant_type=urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth%3Agrant-type%3Avp_token-bearer
     &assertion=eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjE2In0.
     eyJpc3Mi[...omitted for brevity...].
     J9l-ZhwP[...omitted for brevity...]
     &presentation_submission= {..}

## 3.1 Assertion Encoding

As stated in the previous section, the assertion parameter can either be encoded in JSON or JWT.
The authorization server determines the encoding by adding the correct parameters to the authorization server metadata [RFC8414]].
The following parameter MUST be added:

* `vp_formats`: An object defining the formats and proof types of Verifiable Presentations and Verifiable Credentials that a Verifier supports as stated by §9 of the OpenID for Verifiable Presentations specification [OIDC4VP].

>   (ldp_vp or jwt_vp)

Reviewer 2: leftover, missing something?

When processing the assertion the authorization server can detect the used format by checking the initial character.
A JSON encoded assertion starts with a '{' character or '%7B' when urlencoded.

## 4. Processing requirements

In order to issue an access token response as described in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749], the authorization server MUST validate the VP.
The validation requirements are split into three paragraphs. The first paragraph describes the requirements that apply to all VP's.
The second paragraph describes the requirements that apply to JWT encoded VP's. The third paragraph describes the requirements that apply to JSON encoded VP's.

### 4.1 General requirements

1. The authorization server MUST validate the Presentation Submission according to section 6 of the Presentation Exchange [PE] specification.

> 2. The authorization server MUST validate the VP according to section 6.1 of the Presentation Exchange [PE] specification.

Reviewer 2: section 6.1 != section 6?

Author: True, 6 describes things in general and broader, 6.1 has the exact list of points to check

3. The Presentation Submission MUST be an answer to the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope. 
   How an authorization server determines the Presentation Definition based on scope is out of scope of this specification.

>    However, a request to the Presentation Definition endpoint MUST result to the same Presentation Definition as the Presentation Definition that is used to validate the VP.

Reviewer 2: result to -> result in

hard to read sentence

> 4. The Verifiable Presentation MUST be not be valid for more than 15 minutes.

Reviewer 2: why? This totally depends on the use case?

Author: Not really, it's created to get an access token. Once you have the access token, the VP is no longer needed.

Reviewer 2: > Most of our RFCs are a mix of technical concepts combined with profile-esque components though.

I don't think this is necesarrily bad (for us), but we shoukd probably clearly split things (like you suggested putting this instance in security considerations).

5. A clock skew of no more than 5 seconds MAY be applied when validating the Verifiable Presentation.

### 4.2 JWT requirements

> 

Reviewer 2: These are general format requirements for the assertion in JWT and JSON, but it's a subchapter of "Processing". So I'd move it out of the "Processing" chapter, or rename it. And not totally clear to what this applies (assertion field I guess? States in an introduction before, but should be clear from the chapter titles)

Author: used longer titles

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JWT according to §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The `vp` field of the JWT MUST be valid according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

> 3. The `nonce` of the JWT MUST be a string that is unique for each request.

Reviewer 2: "request" is ambiguous

4. The `kid` field MUST be a DID URL.

> 5. The `iss` field MUST be a Decentralized Identifier [DID] and MUST correspond to the `kid`.

Reviewer 2: > The `iss` field MUST be a Decentralized Identifier [DID] and MUST correspond to the `kid`.

I think this should just be the DID of the VC holder. Then `kid` points to the verification method ID.

> 6. The `sub` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.ID` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. The `sub` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
```

> 7. The `aud` field MUST be a DID under control of the Authorization Server.

Reviewer 2: not really useful, how is it checked?

Author: changed to MUST match the DID of the AS

### 4.3 JSON requirements

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JSON object according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The proof of the VP MUST be a valid [JSONWebSignature2020] object.

> 3. The `challenge` field of the JSON object MUST be a string that is unique for each request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The `challenge` field of the JSON object MUST be a string that is unique for each token request.
```

should this be checked by the AS?

4. The `domain` field of the JSON object MUST be a DID under control of the Authorization Server.

> 5. The `issuer` field of the JSON object MUST be a Decentralized Identifier [DID].

Reviewer 2: the VP doesn't have an `issuer` field

6. The `verificationMethod` field of the Proof MUST be a DID URL and correspond to the `issuer` field.

> 7. The `holder` field if present MUST match the `credentialSubject.ID` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. The `holder` field if present MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
```

> 8. If the `holder` field is not present then the `issuer` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.ID` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. If the `holder` field is not present then the `issuer` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
```

## 5. Presentation Definition endpoint

> In order for a client to know which Presentation Definition [PE] to use, the authorization server MUST provide a Presentation Definition endpoint.

Reviewer 2: specify what parameters are expected and an example

The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST be registered as a `presentation_definition_endpoint` in the authorization server metadata [RFC8414].
The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST return a Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.

## 6. Access Token Introspection

> The authorization server MUST support the access token introspection endpoint as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC7662].

Reviewer 2: Not sure whether this should be in scope of this RFC, since it's not relevant for the client. I would specify it as if the AS were to support Token Introspection, the fields SHOULD map as follows

> The introspection endpoint MUST return the following fields:

Reviewer 2: don't we want to return the VP itself in token introspection?

Author: The token can't be valid after the VP expires, added that to 4.1

* `iss`: The issuer of the access token.
* `sub`: The subject of the access token.
* `exp`: The expiration time of the access token.
* `iat`: The time the access token was issued.
* `scope`: The granted scope.

> * `vcs`: The Verifiable Credentials that were used to request the access token.

Reviewer 2: Format? IDs, JWTs, JSON?

Author: Full VC is required since IDs can't be mapped to anything.

## 2. Terminology

All terms are as defined in the following specifications: "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework" [RFC6749], the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] "JSON Web Token (JWT)" [JWT], Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL], Verifiable Credentials Presentation Exchange [PE], JSON Web Signature 2020 [JSONWebSignature2020], Decentralized Identifiers 1.0 [DID].

## 3. HTTP Parameter Bindings for Transporting Assertions

The OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] defines generic HTTP parameters for transporting assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) during interactions with a token endpoint. 
This section defines specific parameters and treatments of those parameters for use with VP Bearer Tokens as Authorization Grants.

To use a VP as an authorization grant, the client uses an access token request as defined in Section 4 of the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] with the following specific parameter values and encodings.

The value of the "grant_type" is "vp_token-bearer".

The value of the "assertion" parameter MUST contain a Verifiable Presentation. The Verifiable Presentation MUST be encoded as either:

> * The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JSON using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.

Reviewer 2: This applies to encoding multiple values, but the JSON blob is just 1 value. And it's also not a content-type in HTTP sense?

```suggestion
* The Verifiable Presentation in JSON format, URL encoded.
```

* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JWT according to section §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

The "scope" parameter MUST be used, as defined in the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC6749], to indicate the requested scope. 
The scope parameter determines the set of credentials the Authorization Server expects.

The "presentation_submission" parameter MUST be used, as defined in Presentation Exchange [PE], to indicate how the VP matches the requested Verifiable Credentials.

> The Presentation Submission MUST be encoded using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Presentation Submission MUST in JSON format, URL encoded.
```

# RFC021 VP Token Grant Type

|                           |                  |
|:--------------------------|:-----------------|
| Nuts foundation           | W.M. Slakhorst   |
| Request for Comments: 021 | Nedap            |
|                           | September 2023   |

## VP Token Grant Type

### Abstract

This specification defines the use of a Verifiable Presentation Bearer Token as a means for requesting an OAuth 2.0 access token.

### Status of document

This document is currently in draft.

### Copyright Notice

![](../.gitbook/assets/license.png)

This document is released under the [Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International \(CC BY-SA 4.0\) license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

## 1.  Introduction

A Verifiable Presentation [VP] is an encoding that enables identity and security information based on Verifiable Credentials to be shared across security domains. 
A security token is generally issued by an Authorization Server and consumed by a Relying Party that relies on its content to make authorization decisions. 

> In the case of Verifiable Credentials, the assertion is self-issued by the holder using a wallet. 

Author: should be presentation.

Access tokens are issued to third-party clients by an Authorization Server (AS) with the (sometimes implicit) approval of the resource owner. 
In OAuth, an authorization grant is an abstract term used to describe intermediate credentials that represent the resource owner authorization. 
An authorization grant is used by the client to obtain an access token. Several authorization grant types are defined to support a wide range of client types and user experiences. 
OAuth also allows for the definition of new extension grant types to support additional clients or to provide a bridge between OAuth and other trust frameworks. 
Finally, OAuth allows the definition of additional authentication mechanisms to be used by clients when interacting with the Authorization Server.

"Assertion Framework for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants" [RFC7521] is an abstract extension to OAuth 2.0 that provides a general framework for the use of assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) as client credentials and/or authorization grants with OAuth 2.0. 

> This specification profiles [RFC7521] to define an extension grant type that uses a self-issued Verifiable Presentation Bearer Token to request an OAuth 2.0 access token.

Reviewer: This is weird. L34-35 says that a grant represents the resource owner's authorization that only needs to be exchanged for an access token (because front/back channel stuff), which is correct. But this RFC describes an authorization request at the token endpoint using a grant (which implies access is already granted). Something doesn't feel right here.

Author: This is copy-pasted from RFC7523 to be consistent with what's already out there.....

A Verifiable Presentation is created by a holder and can be used to prove possession of a Verifiable Credential.

> The holder will need to know which Verifiable Credentials are required to access a resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The holder will need to know what evidence is required to access a resource.
```

Author: evidence if too fuzy

The Authorization Server provides this information in the form of a Presentation Definition [PE].

> The complete flow consists of the following steps:

Reviewer: the flow is missing the role of `scope`

1. The client requests a Presentation Definition from the Authorization Server.

> 2. The client creates a Verifiable Presentation that matches the Presentation Definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The client creates a Verifiable Presentation and a Presentation Submission that describes how the VP fulfills the requirements of the Presentation Definition.
```

3. The client requests an access token from the Authorization Server using the Verifiable Presentation as an authorization grant.

> 4. The Authorization Server validates the Verifiable Presentation and Presentation Definition.

Reviewer: The AS should not have to validate something it issued.
```suggestion
4. The Authorization Server validates the Verifiable Presentation and Presentation Submission.
```

5. The Authorization Server issues an access token.

> 6. The client uses the access token to access a resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Usage of the token is out of scope for this RFC?

Reviewer: since introspection is also in there, maybe not out of scope.

## 3. HTTP Parameter Bindings for Transporting Assertions

The OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] defines generic HTTP parameters for transporting assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) during interactions with a token endpoint. 
This section defines specific parameters and treatments of those parameters for use with VP Bearer Tokens as Authorization Grants.

To use a VP as an authorization grant, the client uses an access token request as defined in Section 4 of the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] with the following specific parameter values and encodings.

The value of the "grant_type" is "vp_token-bearer".

The value of the "assertion" parameter MUST contain a Verifiable Presentation. The Verifiable Presentation MUST be encoded as either:

* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JSON using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.
* The Verifiable Presentation is encoded as JWT according to section §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

> The "scope" parameter MUST be used, as defined in the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521], to indicate the requested scope. 

Reviewer: `scope` is not defined in `OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521]`, should be RFC6749?

The Presentation Submission MUST be encoded using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type.

The following example demonstrates an access token request with a VP as an authorization grant (with extra line breaks for display purposes only):

     POST /token.oauth2 HTTP/1.1
     Host: as.example.com
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

     grant_type=vp_token-bearer
     &assertion=eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjE2In0.
     eyJpc3Mi[...omitted for brevity...].
     J9l-ZhwP[...omitted for brevity...]
     &presentation_submission= {..}
     &scope=a_scope

## 3.1 Assertion Encoding

The assertion parameter can either be encoded in JSON or JWT.
The Authorization Server determines the encoding by adding the correct parameters to the Authorization Server metadata [RFC8414]].
The following parameter MUST be added:

* `vp_formats`: An object defining the formats and proof types of Verifiable Presentations and Verifiable Credentials that a Verifier supports as stated by §9 of the OpenID for Verifiable Presentations specification [OIDC4VP].

When processing the assertion the Authorization Server can detect the used format by checking the initial character.

> A JSON encoded assertion starts with a '{' character or '%7B' when urlencoded.

Reviewer: Presentation submission should say if its JWT or JSON?

Author: Even so, format still has to be detected. Maybe better to remove comment entirely?

Author: A submission only details the types of the VCs not the VP

Reviewer: From [OpenID4VP](https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.html#name-response-parameters)
> vp_token: REQUIRED. JSON String or JSON object that MUST contain a single Verifiable Presentation or an array of JSON Strings and JSON objects each of them containing a Verifiable Presentations...

So the `vp_token` consists of 1 or more VPs, and the credentials are always nested in the VPs. (OpenID4VP allows nesting 1 level deep exactly for this reason.)

See example from the link
```
{
    "id": "Presentation example 1",
    "definition_id": "Example with selective disclosure",
    "descriptor_map": [
        {
            "id": "ID card with constraints",
            "format": "ldp_vp",
            "path": "$",
            "path_nested": {
                "format": "ldp_vc",
                "path": "$.verifiableCredential[0]"
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

This specifies the format of the VP

Reviewer: After further assessment I now believe PEX/JSONPath also allows the above to be expressed as
```
{
    "id": "Presentation example 2",
    "definition_id": "Example with multiple VPs",
    "descriptor_map": [
        {
            "id": "ID Card with constraints",
            "format": "ldp_vc",
            "path": "$[0].verifiableCredential[0]"
        },
        {
            "id": "Ontario Health Insurance Plan",
            "format": "jwt_vc_json",
            "path": "$[1].vp.verifiableCredential[0]"
        }
    ]
}
```
In this case the format of the VP is not known...

This stuff is too complex...

Author: encoding line has been removed, so conversation is no longer valid or no longer on topic.

## 4. JWT Format and Processing Requirements

In order to issue an access token response as described in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749], the Authorization Server MUST validate the VP.
The validation requirements are split into three paragraphs. The first paragraph describes the requirements that apply to all VP's.
The second paragraph describes the requirements that apply to JWT encoded VP's. The third paragraph describes the requirements that apply to JSON encoded VP's.

### 4.1 General processing requirements

1. The Authorization Server MUST validate the Presentation Submission according to section 6 of the Presentation Exchange [PE] specification.
2. The Authorization Server MUST validate the VP and Presentation Submission according to section 6.1 of the Presentation Exchange [PE] specification.
3. The Presentation Submission MUST be an answer to the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.
   How an Authorization Server determines the Presentation Definition based on scope is out of scope of this specification.

> 4. The Verifiable Presentation validity determines the upper bound of access token validity.

Reviewer: It's not completely clear but I think you're referring to expiration of the VP here (point 4), but this also suggests that a VP is only valid as long as its contents are valid. This in turn implies that you also have to verify all credentials again when the token is used. Is this the idea?

If I show my ID to get access to something my access is generally not revoked as soon as my ID expires? I think the evidence granting the access tokens should not be re-evaluated once accepted. It's just too messy. Tokens should be short lived to minimize the effect of status changes in the evidence.

Author: The checking of the VP happens only once, at that point the VCs must be valid. If the VP has a validity of only 15 minutes, the access token can't be valid for 30 minutes.

> 5. A clock skew of no more than 5 seconds MAY be applied when validating the Verifiable Presentation.

Author: Yes for the `nbf`. Clockskew goes both ways

> ### 4.2 JWT format requirements

Author: renamed kid field to kid header. Other requirements are covered by §6.3.1

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JWT according to §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

> 2. The `vp` field of the JWT MUST be valid according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

Author: Via the listed VCs in the VP according to point 6

> 2. The `vp` field of the JWT MUST be valid according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

Reviewer 2: All of these processing rules are in addition to VC data model chapter 6.x?

> 2. The `vp` field of the JWT MUST be valid according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

Reviewer: solved by adding `iss==sub` in the next point

> 3. The `nonce` of the JWT MUST be a string that is unique for each access token request.

Author: It's marked as id in the VC-DATA-MODEL spec, not as nonce.

4. The `domain` field of the JSON object MUST be a DID under control of the Authorization Server.
5. The `verificationMethod` field of the Proof MUST be a DID URL.
6. The `holder` field if present MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
7. The `verificationMethod` field of the proof MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.

## 5. Presentation Definition endpoint

In order for a client to know which Presentation Definition [PE] to use, the Authorization Server MUST provide a Presentation Definition endpoint.
The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST be registered as a `presentation_definition_endpoint` in the Authorization Server metadata [RFC8414].
The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST return a Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.
The endpoint has a single query parameter `scope` that contains the requested scope. The parameter may contain multiple values.

The following example shows a request to the Presentation Definition endpoint:

>     GET /presentation_definition?scope=a&scope=b HTTP/1.1

Author: How to cope with patient specific has been addressed

    Host: as.example.com

## 6. Access Token Introspection

The Authorization Server MAY support an access token introspection endpoint as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC7662].
The introspection endpoint SHOULD map the fields as follows:

* `iss`: The issuer of the access token (DID).
* `sub`: The subject of the access token (DID).
* `exp`: The expiration time of the access token.
* `iat`: The time the access token was issued.
* `scope`: The granted scope.
* `vcs`: The Verifiable Credentials that were used to request the access token using the same encoding as used in the access token request.

## 7. Security Considerations

The nonce/challenge (nonce) is used to prevent replay attacks. The nonce is a random string that is generated by the client.
The nonce is included in the signed data. The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that uses a nonce that has been used before.

> The Authorization Server MAY reduce storage requirements by only storing the nonce for the lifetime of the Verifiable Presentation.

Author: That's not possible within this flow. It could be possible if the PD endpoint returns the nonce.
The spec should then add how long that nonce can be valid for.

All endpoints MUST be protected by TLS, version 1.2 as a minimum.

## 8. Privacy considerations

This RFC is meant to be used in a machine to machine context.

> If any personal data may be accessed with an `vp_token-bearer` access token, it's recommended to reevaluate and use the OpenID4VP specification and include user authorization.

Reviewer: what does `include user authorization` mean?

Author: A user must be present and authorise itself before access is granted.

Author: should have be authentication

3. The client requests an access token from the Authorization Server using the Verifiable Presentation as an authorization grant.
4. The Authorization Server validates the Verifiable Presentation and Presentation Submission.
5. The Authorization Server issues an access token.
6. The client uses the access token to access a resource.

## 2. Terminology

All terms are as defined in the following specifications: "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework" [RFC6749], the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] "JSON Web Token (JWT)" [JWT], Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL], Verifiable Credentials Presentation Exchange [PE], JSON Web Signature 2020 [JSONWebSignature2020], Decentralized Identifiers 1.0 [DID].

## 3. HTTP Parameter Bindings for Transporting Assertions

The OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] defines generic HTTP parameters for transporting assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) during interactions with a token endpoint. 
This section defines specific parameters and treatments of those parameters for use with VP Bearer Tokens as Authorization Grants.

> To use a VP as an authorization grant, the client uses an access token request as defined in Section 4 of the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] with the following specific parameter values and encodings.

Reviewer: Does the grant always contain a single VP (makes sense for s2s flow) or can it contain a VP array as in OpenID4VP?

Author: Theoretically a server could combine multiple wallets... (like vendor and tenant). Let's start with 1 and see how far we get.

The "scope" parameter MUST be used, as defined in the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC6749], to indicate the requested scope. 
The scope parameter determines the set of credentials the Authorization Server expects.

The "presentation_submission" parameter MUST be used, as defined in Presentation Exchange [PE], to indicate how the VP matches the requested Verifiable Credentials.
The Presentation Submission MUST be in JSON format, URL encoded.

The following example demonstrates an access token request with a VP as an authorization grant (with extra line breaks for display purposes only):

     POST /token.oauth2 HTTP/1.1
     Host: as.example.com
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

     grant_type=vp_token-bearer
     &assertion=eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjE2In0.
     eyJpc3Mi[...omitted for brevity...].
     J9l-ZhwP[...omitted for brevity...]
     &presentation_submission= {..}
     &scope=a_scope

## 3.1 Assertion Encoding

The assertion parameter can either be encoded in JSON or JWT.
The Authorization Server determines the encoding by adding the correct parameters to the Authorization Server metadata [RFC8414]].
The following parameter MUST be added:

> * `vp_formats`: An object defining the formats and proof types of Verifiable Presentations and Verifiable Credentials that a Verifier supports as stated by §9 of the OpenID for Verifiable Presentations specification [OIDC4VP].

Reviewer: This is the appropriate abbreviation now that the C is no longer in the specification name.
```suggestion
* `vp_formats`: An object defining the formats and proof types of Verifiable Presentations and Verifiable Credentials that a Verifier supports as stated by §9 of the OpenID for Verifiable Presentations specification [OpenID4VP].
```

3. The Presentation Submission MUST be an answer to the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.
   How an Authorization Server determines the Presentation Definition based on scope is out of scope of this specification.
4. A clock skew of no more than 5 seconds MAY be applied when validating the Verifiable Presentation.

### 4.2 JWT format requirements

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JWT according to §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The `vp` field of the JWT MUST be valid according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
3. The `iss` field MUST be a Decentralized Identifier [DID] and match the `sub` field.
4. The `kid` header MUST be a DID URL and MUST resolve to a verificationMethod in the DID Document. The DID part of the DID URL MUST match the `iss` field.
5. The `sub` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
6. The `aud` field MUST match the DID of the Authorization Server.
7. The `iat` field MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be before the current time.

> 8. The `exp` field MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be after the current time.

Reviewer: Is it relevant to state that it is a UNIX timestamp?

9. The difference between the `exp` and `iat` fields MUST be equal or less than 5 seconds.
10. The `jti` field MUST be present and contain a string that is unique for each access token request.

### 4.3 JSON format requirements

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JSON object according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The proof of the VP MUST be a valid [JSONWebSignature2020] object.
3. The `challenge` field of the JSON object MUST be a string that is unique for each token request.
4. The `domain` field of the JSON object MUST be a DID under control of the Authorization Server.
5. The `verificationMethod` field of the Proof MUST be a DID URL.
6. The `verificationMethod` field of the proof MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
7. The `created` field of the proof MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be before the current time.

> 8. The `expires` field of the proof MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be after the current time.

Reviewer: same here

Author: ISO8601 actually

> 8. The `expires` field of the proof MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be after the current time.

Reviewer: I think all fields are part of the Proof? Feels a bit repetitive

The 10 seconds is based on the 5-second clock skew and the 5-second maximum difference between the expires and issued fields.

### 4.5 Error Response

If the Authorization Server determines that the VP is invalid, the Authorization Server MUST return an error response as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749].
In addition to the error response defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749], the Authorization Server MUST return a HTTP 400 (Bad Request) and use the following error codes when the VP is invalid:

* `invalid_verifiable_presentation`: The VP is invalid. This error code is used when the signature is incorrect or when a required field is missing.
* `invalid_presentation_submission`: The Presentation Submission is invalid. This error code is used when the Presentation Submission is not an answer to the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.
* `invalid_verifiable_credentials`: The submitted Verifiable Credentials do not meet the requirements. This error code is used when the Verifiable Credentials aren't corresponding to the Presentation Definition or when the Verifiable Credentials are expired, not trusted or invalid. 

> It is also used when the Verifiable Credentials are not issued to the signer of the Verifiable Presentation.

Reviewer: I'd say this falls under `invalid_request` and doesn't require a new error response?

## 5. Presentation Definition endpoint

In order for a client to know which Presentation Definition [PE] to use, the Authorization Server MUST provide a Presentation Definition endpoint.
The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST be registered as a `presentation_definition_endpoint` in the Authorization Server metadata [RFC8414].

> The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST return a single Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.

Reviewer: OAuth generally allows the AS to return an answer for a smaller scope than requested. Probably doesn't make sense for our use cases, but might if we want publish outside our domain. In that case the endpoint also needs to return the scope the PD is for.

Author: Let's see if we get that feedback from the rest of the world, since it would change the return value of the API.

The client MUST support the Submission Requirement Feature [PE].
The endpoint has a single query parameter `scope` that contains the requested scope. The parameter may contain multiple values.

> Values are separated by a space and MUST be URL encoded.

Reviewer: point to standard OAuth definition for scope?

Author: There it's mostly used as form encoded value and not as query param?

An empty scope MAY be used. The Authorization Server MUST return a Presentation Definition which MAY contain constraints.

The following example shows a request to the Presentation Definition endpoint:

    GET /presentation_definition?scope=a+b HTTP/1.1
    Host: as.example.com

## 6. Access Token Introspection

The Authorization Server MAY support an access token introspection endpoint as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC7662].
The introspection endpoint SHOULD map the fields as follows:

* `iss`: The issuer of the access token (DID).
* `sub`: The subject of the access token (DID), this is the resource owner. Usually the same as the `iss` field.
* `client_id`: The client (DID) that requested the access token.
* `exp`: The expiration time of the access token.
* `iat`: The time the access token was issued.
* `scope`: The granted scope.

> * `vcs`: The Verifiable Credentials that were used to request the access token using the same encoding as used in the access token request.

Reviewer: add `active`: (required per rfc7662) boolean indicating if the token is valid (syntax, iat < now > exp, valid signature, not revoked, etc.).

`vcs` should be replaced by the PDP map and friends as discussed, see https://github.com/nuts-foundation/nuts-node/pull/2567. I'm fine updating this at a later point though.

The Presentation Definition endpoint contains a scope parameter which could be logged in an access log.
Privacy-sensitive data in the scope parameter should be avoided.

## 9. References

* [RFC6749] D. Hardt, "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework", RFC 6749, October 2012, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6749>.
* [RFC7521] D. Campbell, Ed., B. Zaninovich, Ed., "Assertion Framework for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants", RFC 7521, DOI 10.17487/RFC7521, May 2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7521>.
* [JWT] M. Jones, J. Bradley, N. Sakimura, "JSON Web Token (JWT)", RFC 7519, May 2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7519>.
* [VC-DATA-MODEL] M. Sporny, D. Longley, D. Chadwick, "Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1", W3C Recommendation, 3 March 2022, <https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/>.
* [PE] D. Buchner, B. Zundel, M. Riedel, K.H. Duffy, "Presentation Exchange 2.0.0", 12 September 2023, <https://identity.foundation/presentation-exchange/spec/v2.0.0/>.
* [JSONWebSignature2020] O. Steel, M. Prorock, C.E. Lehner, "JSON Web Signature 2020", W3C Community Group Report, 21 July 2022, <https://w3c-ccg.github.io/lds-jws2020/>.

> * [OIDC4VP] O. Terbu, T. Lodderstedt, K. Yasuda, T. Looker, "OpenID for Verifiable Presentations Draft 18", OpenID connect working group, 21 April 2023, <https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.html>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [OpenID4VP] O. Terbu, T. Lodderstedt, K. Yasuda, T. Looker, "OpenID for Verifiable Presentations Draft 18", OpenID connect working group, 21 April 2023, <https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.html>.
```

3. The Presentation Submission MUST fulfill the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.
   How an Authorization Server determines the Presentation Definition based on scope is out of scope of this specification.
4. A clock skew of no more than 5 seconds MAY be applied when validating the Verifiable Presentation.

### 4.2 JWT format requirements

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JWT according to §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The `vp` field of the JWT MUST be valid according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
3. The `iss` field MUST be a Decentralized Identifier [DID] and match the `sub` field.
4. The `kid` header MUST be a DID URL and MUST resolve to a verificationMethod in the DID Document. The DID part of the DID URL MUST match the `iss` field.
5. The `sub` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
6. The `aud` field MUST match the DID of the Authorization Server.

> 7. The `iat` field MUST be present and contain a valid unix timestamp. It MUST be before the the current time (time at which the JWT is processed).

Reviewer: VC spec defines that the issuance time of a VP/VC maps to `nbf`, not `iat`

> 7. The `iat` field MUST be present and contain a valid unix timestamp. It MUST be before the the current time (time at which the JWT is processed).

Reviewer: VC spec defines that the issuance time of a VP/VC maps to `nbf`, not `iat`

8. The `exp` field MUST be present and contain a valid unix timestamp. It MUST be after the current time (time at which the JWT is processed).
9. The difference between the `exp` and `nbf` fields MUST be equal or less than 5 seconds.

> 10. The `jti` field MUST be present and contain a string that is unique for each access token request.

Reviewer: the `vc-data-model` maps `jti` to the VC/VP `id` value. A value should not have 2 meanings, so we should use `nonce` here too. We're then using `nonce` for replay prevention in both data formats which is a nice bonus I'd say.

Reviewer: The security considerations section needs some rewording if this is added

### 4.3 JSON-LD format requirements

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JSON object according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The proof of the VP MUST be a valid [JSONWebSignature2020] object. Additional requirements for the proof object:
   1. The `challenge` field MUST be a string that is unique for each token request.

>    2. The `domain` field MUST be a DID under control of the Authorization Server.

Reviewer 2: For JWT it's specified as:
```suggestion
   2. The `domain` field MUST match the DID of the Authorization Server.
```

   3. The `verificationMethod` field MUST be a DID URL.
   4. The ID part of the DID in the `verificationMethod` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
   5. The `created` field MUST be present and contain a valid ISO8601 formatted date string. It MUST be before the current time (time at which the assertion is processed).
   6. The `expires` field MUST be present and contain a valid ISO8601 formatted date string. It MUST be after the current time (time at which the assertion is processed).
   7. The difference between the `expires` and `created` fields MUST be equal or less than 5 seconds.

### 4.4 Preventing Token Replay

The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that uses the a value for `jti` (JWT proofs) or `nonce` (JSON Web Proofs) that has been used before.

> This approach has been chosen over the `nonce` field because there's no initial request to get a nonce from the Authorization Server.

Reviewer: After seeing more specs the `nonce` value (in JWTs) can be issued by both AS and RP
```suggestion
```

OAuth also allows for the definition of new extension grant types to support additional clients or to provide a bridge between OAuth and other trust frameworks. 
Finally, OAuth allows the definition of additional authentication mechanisms to be used by clients when interacting with the Authorization Server.

"Assertion Framework for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants" [RFC7521] is an abstract extension to OAuth 2.0 that provides a general framework for the use of assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) as client credentials and/or authorization grants with OAuth 2.0. 
This specification profiles [RFC7521] to define an extension grant type that uses a self-issued Verifiable Presentation Bearer Token to request an OAuth 2.0 access token.

A Verifiable Presentation is created by a holder and can be used to prove possession of a Verifiable Credential.
The holder will need to know which Verifiable Credentials are required to access a resource.
The Authorization Server provides this information in the form of a Presentation Definition [PE].
The complete flow consists of the following steps:

> 1. The client requests a Presentation Definition from the Authorization Server based on a scope.

Author: These point use client and AS as the actual systems doing the requests.

4. The Authorization Server validates the Verifiable Presentation and Presentation Submission.
5. The Authorization Server issues an access token.
6. The client uses the access token to access a resource.

## 2. Terminology

All terms are as defined in the following specifications: "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework" [RFC6749], the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] "JSON Web Token (JWT)" [JWT], Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL], Verifiable Credentials Presentation Exchange [PE], JSON Web Signature 2020 [JSONWebSignature2020], Decentralized Identifiers 1.0 [DID].

## 3. HTTP Parameter Bindings for Transporting Assertions

The OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] defines generic HTTP parameters for transporting assertions (a.k.a. security tokens) during interactions with a token endpoint. 
This section defines specific parameters and treatments of those parameters for use with VP Bearer Tokens as Authorization Grants.

To use a VP as an authorization grant, the client uses an access token request as defined in Section 4 of the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC7521] with the following specific parameter values and encodings.

> The value of the "grant_type" is "vp_token-bearer".

Reviewer 2: Shouln't we use backticks for field names and parameters, insted of quotes?

The `scope` parameter MUST be used, as defined in the OAuth Assertion Framework [RFC6749], to indicate the requested scope. 
The scope parameter determines the set of credentials the Authorization Server expects.

The "presentation_submission" parameter MUST be used, as defined in Presentation Exchange [PE], to indicate how the VP matches the requested Verifiable Credentials.
The Presentation Submission MUST be in JSON format, URL encoded.

The following example demonstrates an access token request with a VP as an authorization grant (with extra line breaks for display purposes only):

     POST /token.oauth2 HTTP/1.1
     Host: as.example.com
     Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

     grant_type=vp_token-bearer
     &assertion=eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjE2In0.
     eyJpc3Mi[...omitted for brevity...].
     J9l-ZhwP[...omitted for brevity...]
     &presentation_submission= {..}
     &scope=a_scope

## 3.1 Assertion Encoding

The assertion parameter can either be encoded in JSON or JWT.
The Authorization Server determines the encoding by adding the correct parameters to the Authorization Server metadata [RFC8414]].

> The following parameter MUST be added:
> 
> * `vp_formats`: An object defining the formats and proof types of Verifiable Presentations and Verifiable Credentials that a Verifier supports as stated by §9 of the OpenID for Verifiable Presentations specification [OpenID4VP].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `vp_formats` parameter MUST be added. It MUST contain an object defining the formats and proof types of Verifiable Presentations and Verifiable Credentials that a Verifier supports as stated by §9 of the OpenID for Verifiable Presentations specification [OpenID4VP].
```

## 4. JWT Format and Processing Requirements

In order to issue an access token response as described in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749], the Authorization Server MUST validate the VP.
The validation requirements are split into three paragraphs. The first paragraph describes the requirements that apply to all VP's.
The second paragraph describes the requirements that apply to JWT encoded VP's. The third paragraph describes the requirements that apply to JSON encoded VP's.

### 4.1 General processing requirements

1. The Authorization Server MUST validate the Presentation Submission according to section 6 of the Presentation Exchange [PE] specification.
2. The Authorization Server MUST validate the VP and Presentation Submission according to section 6.1 of the Presentation Exchange [PE] specification.
3. The Presentation Submission MUST be an answer to the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.
   How an Authorization Server determines the Presentation Definition based on scope is out of scope of this specification.

> 4. A clock skew of no more than 5 seconds MAY be applied when validating the Verifiable Presentation.

Reviewer 2: Arbitrary, I'd say the 5 and 10 seconds are up to the implementation to decide. But we can give an example.

Author: Both sides must use the same value, it's therefore part of the spec and not the implementation.

### 4.2 JWT format requirements

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JWT according to §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The `vp` field of the JWT MUST be valid according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
3. The `iss` field MUST be a Decentralized Identifier [DID] and match the `sub` field.
4. The `kid` header MUST be a DID URL and MUST resolve to a verificationMethod in the DID Document. The DID part of the DID URL MUST match the `iss` field.
5. The `sub` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
6. The `aud` field MUST match the DID of the Authorization Server.

> 7. The `iat` field MUST be present and contain a valid unix timestamp. It MUST be before the current time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. The `iat` field MUST be present and contain a valid unix timestamp. It MUST be before the current time (time at which the JWT is processed).
```

8. The `exp` field MUST be present and contain a valid unix timestamp. It MUST be after the current time.

> 9. The difference between the `exp` and `iat` fields MUST be equal or less than 5 seconds.

Reviewer 2: up to implementor

> 10. The `jti` field MUST be present and contain a string that is unique for each access token request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
10. The `jti` field MUST be present and contain a string that is unique for each access token request for the issuer.
```

Author: Better to make it totally unique, that way it's still unique for the issuer.

> ### 4.3 JSON format requirements

Reviewer 2: Isn't this "just" JSON-LD?

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JSON object according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The proof of the VP MUST be a valid [JSONWebSignature2020] object. Additional requirements for the proof object:
   1. The `challenge` field MUST be a string that is unique for each token request.

>    2. The `domain` field MUST be a DID under control of the Authorization Server.

Reviewer 2: How should this be validated? If not validated, why bother?

Author: You'll use it as tenant selection

   3. The `verificationMethod` field MUST be a DID URL.

>    4. The id part of the DID in the `verificationMethod` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   4. The ID part of the DID in the `verificationMethod` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
```

>    5. The `created` field MUST be present and contain a valid ISO8601 formatted date string. It MUST be before the current time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   5. The `created` field MUST be present and contain a valid ISO8601 formatted date string. It MUST be before the current time (time at which the assertion is processed).
```

   6. The `expires` field MUST be present and contain a valid ISO8601 formatted date string. It MUST be after the current time.
   7. The difference between the `expires` and `created` fields MUST be equal or less than 5 seconds.

### 4.4 Preventing Token Replay

> The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that uses the unique value (`jti` or `challenge`) that has been used before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that uses a value for `jti` (JWT proofs) or `challenge` (JSON Web Proofs) that has been used before, by the given issuer.
```

Author: If it uses a value that has been used by another issuer, that would also be extremely weird.

> The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that uses the unique value (`jti` or `challenge`) that has been used before.

Reviewer 2: why not use `nonce`?

This approach has been chosen over the `nonce` field because there's no initial request to get a nonce from the Authorization Server.
The Authorization Server MUST store the unique value for 10 seconds and MUST reject any request that uses a unique value that has been used before.
The 10 seconds is based on the 5-second clock skew and the 5-second maximum difference between the expires and issued fields.

### 4.5 Error Response

If the Authorization Server determines that the VP is invalid, the Authorization Server MUST return an error response as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749].
In addition to the error response defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749], the Authorization Server MUST return a HTTP 400 (Bad Request) and use the following error codes when the VP is invalid:

> * `invalid_verifiable_presentation`: The VP is invalid. This error code is used when the signature is incorrect or when a required field is missing.

Reviewer 2: should it be "invalid assertion"? (as that reflects the parameter name)

Author: removed all custom errors since it creates too much confusion amongst reviewers.

* `invalid_presentation_submission`: The Presentation Submission is invalid. This error code is used when the Presentation Submission is not an answer to the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.

> An `invalid_request` is returned for any submitted Verifiable Credentials that do not meet the requirements, when the Verifiable Credentials aren't corresponding to the Presentation Definition or when the Verifiable Credentials are expired, not trusted or invalid. 

Reviewer 2: Kinda ambiguous with "invalid_verifiable_presentation"; if the contained credentials are invalid, it could also be seen as "invalid_verifiable_presentation"?

Also, I think there (ideally) should not be any other "trust" anchors than the one specified by the Presentation Definition. Otherwise, RP and AS still have to agree on a set of trust anchors outside of this specification.

Author: We currently decided on putting trust anchors in the PDs, that does not mean that this is mandatory through this RFC. 'Trust' is therefore still required, but undefined how it's solved.

The following example shows a request to the Presentation Definition endpoint:

    GET /presentation_definition?scope=a+b HTTP/1.1
    Host: as.example.com

## 6. Access Token Introspection

The Authorization Server MAY support an access token introspection endpoint as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC7662].
The introspection endpoint SHOULD map the fields as follows:

* `active`: If the access token is valid.
* `iss`: The issuer of the access token (DID).
* `sub`: The subject of the access token (DID), this is the resource owner. Usually the same as the `iss` field.
* `client_id`: The client (DID) that requested the access token.
* `exp`: The expiration time of the access token.
* `iat`: The time the access token was issued.
* `scope`: The granted scope.
* `vps`: The Verifiable Presentations that were used to request the access token using the same encoding as used in the access token request.
* `presentation_submission`: The Presentation Submission that was used to request the access token.

## 7. Security Considerations

The jti/challenge (further called nonce) is used to prevent replay attacks. The nonce is a random string that is generated by the client.

> The nonce is included in the signed data. The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that uses a nonce that has been used before.

Reviewer 2: but it only needs to store them for as long as the presentation is valid

Author: implementation opzitmization.

5. The `verificationMethod` field of the Proof MUST be a DID URL.
6. The `holder` field if present MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
7. The `verificationMethod` field of the proof MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
8. The `created` field of the proof MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be before the current time.
9. The `expires` field of the proof MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be after the current time.
10. The difference between the `expires` and `created` fields MUST be equal or less than 5 seconds.

### 4.4 Preventing Token Replay

The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that uses the unique value (`jti` or `challenge`) that has been used before.
This approach has been chosen over the `nonce` field because there's no initial request to get a nonce from the Authorization Server.
The Authorization Server MUST store the unique value for 10 seconds and MUST reject any request that uses a unique value that has been used before.

> The 10 seconds is based on the 5-second clock skew and the 5-second maximum difference between the expires and issued fields.

Author: For the request, not the access token

It MUST be a string and can contain `:` to indicate specific resources that need to be accessed.
It SHOULD follow the format `resource:id:operation` where `resource` is the resource type, `id` is the specific identifier of the resource and `operation` is the operation that is allowed on the resource.

The following example shows a request to the token endpoint with a main scope and a sub-scope:

    POST /token.oauth2 HTTP/1.1
    Host: as.example.com
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

    grant_type=vp_token-bearer
    &assertion=eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjE2In0.
    eyJpc3Mi[...omitted for brevity...].
    J9l-ZhwP[...omitted for brevity...]
    &presentation_submission= {..}
    &scope=a_scope+a_resource:5:read

## 7. Access Token Introspection

The Authorization Server MAY support an access token introspection endpoint as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC7662].
The introspection endpoint SHOULD map the fields as follows:

* `iss`: The issuer of the access token (DID).
* `sub`: The subject of the access token (DID).
* `exp`: The expiration time of the access token.
* `iat`: The time the access token was issued.
* `scope`: The granted scope.

> * `vcs`: The Verifiable Credentials that were used to request the access token using the same encoding as used in the access token request.

Author: Dunno yet

> ## 8. Security Considerations

Author: has been updated

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JWT according to §6.3.1 of the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
2. The `vp` field of the JWT MUST be valid according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].
3. The `iss` field MUST be a Decentralized Identifier [DID].

> 4. The `kid` header MUST be a DID URL and MUST resolve to a verificationMethod in the DID Document. The DID part of the DID URL MUST match the `iss` field.

Reviewer 2: I saw some DID URLs (I think verificationMethod IDs) that just contained a fragment. We might have to support that in (near) future

4. The `kid` header MUST be a DID URL and MUST resolve to a verificationMethod in the DID Document. The DID part of the DID URL MUST match the `iss` field.
5. The `sub` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
6. The `aud` field MUST match the DID of the Authorization Server.
7. The `iat` field MUST be present and contain a valid unix timestamp. It MUST be before the current time.
8. The `exp` field MUST be present and contain a valid unix timestamp. It MUST be after the current time.
9. The difference between the `exp` and `iat` fields MUST be equal or less than 5 seconds.
10. The `jti` field MUST be present and contain a string that is unique for each access token request.

### 4.3 JSON format requirements

1. The assertion MUST be a valid JSON object according to §4.10 the Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.1 [VC-DATA-MODEL].

> 2. The proof of the VP MUST be a valid [JSONWebSignature2020] object. Additional requirements for the proof object:

Reviewer 2: do we need to support JSON-LD?

   1. The `challenge` field MUST be a string that is unique for each token request.
   2. The `domain` field MUST be a DID under control of the Authorization Server.
   3. The `verificationMethod` field MUST be a DID URL.

>    4. The `verificationMethod` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.

Reviewer 2: Just the ID part, I'd say?

5. The `kid` header MUST be a DID URL and MUST resolve to a verificationMethod in the DID Document. The DID part of the DID URL MUST match the `iss` field.
6. The `sub` field MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
7. The `aud` field MUST match the DID of the Authorization Server.

> 8. The `iat` field MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be before the current time.

Reviewer 2: on, or before?

Author: when validating, before. (with clockskew it may be one as well)

5. The `verificationMethod` field of the Proof MUST be a DID URL.

> 6. The `holder` field if present MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.

Reviewer 2: maybe we should omit this, if the verification method ID already specifies the holder? Otherwise, it only complicates validation.

7. The `verificationMethod` field of the proof MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field from all the Verifiable Credentials that are used to request the access token.
8. The `created` field of the proof MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be before the current time.

> 9. The `expires` field of the proof MUST be present and contain a valid timestamp. It MUST be after the current time.

Reviewer 2: which specifications specify these properties?

10. The difference between the `expires` and `created` fields MUST be equal or less than 5 seconds.

### 4.4 Preventing Token Replay

> The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that uses the unique value (`jti` or `challenge`) that has been used before.

Reviewer 2: why must `challenge` be unique, if `jti` already is?

Author: jti is used for jwt's, challenge for JsonWebSignature2020

This approach has been chosen over the `nonce` field because there's no initial request to get a nonce from the Authorization Server.
The Authorization Server MUST store the unique value for 10 seconds and MUST reject any request that uses a unique value that has been used before.
The 10 seconds is based on the 5-second clock skew and the 5-second maximum difference between the expires and issued fields.

### 4.5 Error Response

If the Authorization Server determines that the VP is invalid, the Authorization Server MUST return an error response as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749].

> In addition to the error response defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC6749], the Authorization Server MUST use the following error codes when the VP is invalid:

Reviewer 2: maybe note that the server MUST also respond with HTTP 400 (Bad Request), since they're all specializations of `invalid_request`?

* `invalid_verifiable_presentation`: The VP is invalid. This error code is used when the signature is incorrect or when a required field is missing.
* `invalid_presentation_submission`: The Presentation Submission is invalid. This error code is used when the Presentation Submission is not an answer to the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.

> * `invalid_verifiable_credentials`: The submitted Verifiable Credentials do not meet the requirements. This error code is used when the Verifiable Credentials aren't corresponding to the Presentation Definition or when the Verifiable Credentials are expired, not trusted or invalid.

Reviewer 2: doesn't this overlap `invalid_presentation_submission` ("This error code is used when the Verifiable Credentials aren't corresponding to the Presentation Definition")?

Author: The idea was that `invalid_presentation_submission` only handels syntax and PS requirements. `invalid_verifiable_credentials` is used for including the wrong set or validity

The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST be registered as a `presentation_definition_endpoint` in the Authorization Server metadata [RFC8414].
The Presentation Definition endpoint MUST return a Presentation Definition array that corresponds with the requested scope.
The endpoint has a single query parameter `scope` that contains the requested scope. The parameter may contain multiple values.
Values are separated by a space and MUST be URL encoded.

The following example shows a request to the Presentation Definition endpoint:

    GET /presentation_definition?scope=a+b HTTP/1.1
    Host: as.example.com

## 6. Scopes

The scope parameter is used to indicate which Verifiable Credentials are required to access a resource.
The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework allows the use of multiple scopes. 
To simplify processing, this specification only allows a single main scope and multiple sub-scopes.
Allowing mixing of different main scopes in a single access token request is out of scope of this specification.
The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that contains multiple main scopes.

> A main scope is defined as the first scope in the scope parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main scope MUST be the first value in the scope parameter.
```

It MUST be present and MUST be a string and can't contain `:`.
A sub-scope is defined as any scope after the main scope.
It MUST be a string and can contain `:` to indicate specific resources that need to be accessed.

> It SHOULD follow the format `resource:id:operation` where `resource` is the resource type, `id` is the specific identifier of the resource and `operation` is the operation that is allowed on the resource.

Reviewer 2: Not sure, do we need to specify this? FHIR and OpenEHR scopes don't follow this exact pattern

* `invalid_verifiable_presentation`: The VP is invalid. This error code is used when the signature is incorrect or when a required field is missing.
* `invalid_presentation_submission`: The Presentation Submission is invalid. This error code is used when the Presentation Submission is not an answer to the Presentation Definition that corresponds with the requested scope.

> An `invalid_request` is returned for any submitted Verifiable Credentials that do not meet the requirements, when the Verifiable Credentials aren't corresponding to the Presentation Definition or when the Verifiable Credentials are expired, not trusted or invalid. 

Reviewer 2: I wonder whether these error codes are too detailed, since the client won't act any differently depending on which of these 3 is returned. It also requires the implementation to map to these exact errors (which might be cumbersome). These 3 could also be "invalid_request" witth additional information in the "description" field?

Author: There could be a difference between a technical error and user error. Technical would be during development and user error would mean the user loaded the incorrect VCs in the wallet?

    GET /presentation_definition?scope=a+b HTTP/1.1
    Host: as.example.com

## 6. Access Token Introspection

The Authorization Server MAY support an access token introspection endpoint as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC7662].
The introspection endpoint SHOULD map the fields as follows:

* `iss`: The issuer of the access token (DID).

> * `sub`: The subject of the access token (DID), this is the resource owner. Usually the same as the `iss` field.

Reviewer 2: this section is not really add anything useful?

Author: Entire chapter 6 or specific fields?

Reviewer 2: May be useful after all, since we don't have a separate introspection RFC, and it adds some claims specific for this RFC (regarding the input descriptors)

The Authorization Server MAY support an access token introspection endpoint as defined in OAuth 2.0 [RFC7662].
The introspection endpoint SHOULD map the fields as follows:

* `active`: If the access token is valid.
* `iss`: The issuer of the access token (DID).
* `sub`: The subject of the access token (DID), this is the resource owner. Usually the same as the `iss` field.
* `client_id`: The client (DID) that requested the access token.
* `exp`: The expiration time of the access token.
* `iat`: The time the access token was issued.
* `scope`: The granted scope.

> * `vps`: The Verifiable Presentations that were used to request the access token using the same encoding as used in the access token request.

Reviewer 2: I think we discussed adding fields specified by input descriptors?

Author: both

Reviewer 2: I'd prefer only to include credentials in the response, that were input for the access token, meaning only those matched by the presentation definition. Why do you think we need the whole VP?

Author: You shouldn't need any of them if all is done correctly. If we're including any data that was used as input then best to include the raw data which are the vps. The vps will also tell you which wallet signed which vcs. Only including vcs won't give you that info. But we can remove it from the spec and just add them to the implementation?

Reviewer: If the `vps` are always the `vp_token` (which is true here), then I think we also need to return the `presentation_submission` to interpret the contents of the `vps`.

Reviewer 2: That's also fine. Might want to choose a style short (acronyms), or long form, though

Allowing mixing of different main scopes in a single access token request is out of scope of this specification.
The Authorization Server MUST reject any request that contains multiple main scopes.

> The main scope MUST be the first value in the scope parameter.

Reviewer 2: I still don't think we should specify how resources are presented in OAuth2 scopes in this RFC, since it depends on whatever system the Bolt is using. And it feels like scope creep for this RFC (since this one is just about server-to-server OAuth2 authentication with a VP). And it might also apply to other RFCs, e.g. OpenID4VP/SIOP?

I'd leave out this whole scope section.

Author: It could be part of the use-case spec
